Title: 8164_AC_DiT_Adaptive_Coordinat.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=qjee4tiBGZ

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# AC-DiT: Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer for Mobile Manipulation 

Sixiang Chen 1,4 ∗

, Jiaming Liu 1∗† , Siyuan Qian 1,4 ∗, Han Jiang 2, Xiaoqi Li 1, Renrui Zhang 3,Zhuoyang Liu 1, Chenyang Gu 1,4 , Chengkai Hou 1, Pengwei Wang 4,

Zhongyuan Wang 4, Shanghang Zhang 1,4 B

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University; 

> 2

Nanjing University; 3CUHK; 4Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI) 

Project web page: ac-dit.github.io 

## Abstract 

Recently, mobile manipulation has attracted increasing attention for enabling language-conditioned robotic control in household tasks. However, existing meth-ods still face challenges in coordinating mobile base and manipulator, primarily due to two limitations. On the one hand, they fail to explicitly model the influence of the mobile base on manipulator control, which easily leads to error accumulation under high degrees of freedom. On the other hand, they treat the entire mobile manipulation process with the same visual observation modality (e.g., either all 2D or all 3D), overlooking the distinct multimodal perception requirements at different stages during mobile manipulation. To address this, we propose the Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer (AC-DiT), which enhances mobile base and manipulator coordination for end-to-end mobile manipulation. First, since the motion of the mobile base directly influences the manipulator’s actions, we introduce a mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism that guides the model to first extract base motion representations, which are then used as context prior for predicting whole-body actions. This enables whole-body control that accounts for the potential impact of the mobile base’s motion. Second, to meet the perception requirements at different stages of mobile manipulation, we design a perception-aware multimodal conditioning strategy that dynamically adjusts the fusion weights between various 2D visual images and 3D point clouds, yielding visual features tailored to the current perceptual needs. This allows the model to, for example, adaptively rely more on 2D inputs when semantic information is crucial for action prediction, while placing greater emphasis on 3D geometric information when precise spatial understanding is required. We empirically validate AC-DiT through extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world mobile manipulation tasks, demonstrating superior performance compared to existing methods. 

## 1 Introduction 

Mobile manipulation, which integrates mobile platforms with manipulative capabilities to perform complex household tasks under natural language conditions, has gained substantial attention. Some two-stage approaches [ 1 , 2, 3 , 4, 5 ] leverage task planners (e.g., VLMs or LLMs) to decompose long-horizon tasks into sub-tasks, which are then executed sequentially by atomic skill modules. In contrast, end-to-end methods [ 6, 7 , 8, 9 , 10 ] typically employ imitation learning or reinforcement learning to jointly optimize the control of both the mobile base and the manipulator. However, these 

> ∗

Equal contribution, †Project lead, BCorresponding author. 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Simulation Experiments              

> AC -DiT
> “move to
> collect trash”
> Image Point Cloud
> Image
> Encoder
> 3D
> Encoder
> Text
> Encoder
> Preception -aware
> Multimodal Adaptation
> Mobile -to -Body
> Conditioning
> Latent Mobility Feature
> Mobile
> Manipulation
> Action Head
> Reweighted Multimodal Feature
> Lightweight
> Mobility
> Action Head
> Performance Real -World Experiments
> Cucumber in basket Store breads Hang Towel Clean table
> MSHab RoboTwin
> Language
> Handover Exterior view Bottles Pick Exterior View
> Move to kitchen counter and pick the bowl.
> Exterior View Wrist View Real -World Simulation Exterior View Wrist View
> Move to fridge and pick the apple.

Figure 1: Overview of AC-DiT. The proposed end-to-end mobile manipulation framework enhances the coordination between the mobile base and the manipulator by introducing two key mechanisms: mobile-to-body conditioning and perception-aware multimodal adaptation. The former enables action prediction that conditioning on how upcoming mobile base movements may affect manipulator control, thereby reducing error accumulation. The latter constructs multimodal features tailored to the perception requirements at different stages of the mobile manipulation process. Under this paradigm, AC-DiT demonstrates superior performance in both simulation and real-world environments. approaches still face significant challenges in effectively coordinating the two components. One key limitation is the lack of explicit modeling of the coordination relationship between the mobile base and manipulator control, which is crucial because even minor errors in the mobile base’s movement can severely impact the manipulator’s performance. In addition, they use the same visual observation modality throughout the entire mobile manipulation process, such as consistently relying on either 2D images or point clouds as input, which overlooks the distinct visual perception requirements of each stage. For example, during object localization, semantically rich 2D images enable better scene understanding and target identification, while during interaction, geometrically detailed point clouds are essential for ensuring precise manipulation. Building on these challenges, we ask: " Can we develop an end-to-end mobile manipulation framework that effectively leverages the relationship between the mobile base and the manipulator, as well as the distinct characteristics of different task stages, to achieve accurate coordination? "To solve the above challenge, as shown in Figure 1, we propose the Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer (AC-DiT), an end-to-end diffusion transformer (DiT) model for mobile manipulation. First, to better formulate the relationship of mobile base while mitigating potential error accumulation from the base’s motion that could affect manipulator control, we introduce a mobility-to-body condition mechanism to enhance whole-body coordination. Specifically, we attach a lightweight mobility policy head (e.g., DiT [ 11 ]) to the encoders and pretrain it using only mobile base actions, enabling it to extract latent mobility features that capture base motion representation. These features are then used as conditional inputs in the subsequent training of the mobile manipulation action head, guiding the prediction of mobile manipulation actions. By providing prior information about the mobile base’s movement, the model can better plan its actions in response to the expected movement of the base, thereby improving the overall coordination and avoiding error accumulation. Second, to adapt the perception system to the varying demands of different stages in the mobile manipulation process, we propose a perception-aware multimodal adaptation mechanism that dynamically assigns appropriate weights to different visual modalities. Specifically, given extracted language features, image features from multiple views, and point cloud features, we first project them into a shared feature space using a lightweight projector. We then compute the cosine similarity between each visual modality (image and point cloud) and the language features to estimate their importance. These similarity-based weights are applied to the original visual tokens and used to produce perception-aware visual representations, which are then fed into policy head for action prediction. In this way, we empirically discover that AC-DiT can adaptively adjust its reliance on different modalities based on stage context—for example, relying more on 2D inputs when semantic information is more critical, and focusing more on 3D inputs when geometric precision is required. Moreover, it can actively downweight the influence of uninformative views, such as images that capture only floors or walls. 2To comprehensively evaluate AC-DiT, as shown in Figure 1, we conduct extensive experiments across multiple tasks, including both simulated environments (e.g., ManiSkill-HAB [ 12 ]) and real-world scenarios. We compare our method with several imitation learning (e.g., DP [ 13 ], DP3 [ 14 ], and RDT [ 11 ]) and mobile manipulation approaches (e.g., ACT [ 7, 6 ] and π0 [ 15 ]), and our method demonstrates a significant advantage over others. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We introduce the Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer (AC-DiT), an end-to-end framework designed to enhance coordination for mobile manipulation by explicitly modeling the relationship between the mobile base and the manipulator, and by adapting to the distinct visual perception requirements at different mobile manipulation stages. • To achieve this, we propose a mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism that conditions over-all mobile manipulation actions on latent mobility representation, enhancing coordination and reducing cumulative errors. We also design a perception-aware multimodal adaptation mechanism that adaptively assigns importance weights to different visual inputs to satisfy the perception requirements of each stage in the mobile manipulation process. • Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in both simulated and real-world mobile manipulation tasks, highlighting its enhanced coordination and robust action generation capabilities. 

## 2 Related works 

Mobile Manipulation. Mobile manipulation tasks require robots to coordinate the motions of a mobile base and a manipulator arm in response to human instructions. A common approach [ 1,2, 3 , 4, 5] leverages a high-level planner [ 16 , 17 ], typically a Vision-Language Model (VLM), to decompose tasks into subtasks, which are then sequentially executed by low-level atomic skill modules (e.g., imitation learning [ 18 , 6, 7, 19 , 20 ], reinforcement learning [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ], or foundation models [ 26 , 27 ]). Alternatively, end-to-end frameworks jointly model the degrees of freedom of both the base and the manipulator within a unified action space, using reinforcement learning [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] or imitation learning [ 6 , 7, 8, 9 , 10 ] to enable holistic optimization for scenarios requiring concurrent or rapidly alternating locomotion and manipulation. However, existing methods rely on single-modality perception (either 2D or 3D) and overlook the modality-specific perceptual granularity required by mobile manipulation. Moreover, they fail to explicitly capture the kinematic and dynamic interdependencies between locomotion and manipulation. Therefore, we propose AC-DiT to address these critical gaps in an end-to-end manner. 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models. Visual-Language-Action (VLA) models empower large-scale models to interpret visual and linguistic inputs while generating corresponding robot actions [ 31 ,32 , 33 , 34 ]. Representative works such as OpenVLA [ 35 ], RT-2 [ 36 ], and ManipLLM [ 37 ] discretize the continuous action space into bins and adopt next-token prediction for action generation, which inevitably compromises the natural continuity of robotic motion. To mitigate this, recent methods replace the VLM’s tokenizer with continuous-valued regression heads [ 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 ] (e.g., MLPs, LSTMs), or integrate diffusion-based transformer modules [ 13 , 43 , 14 , 44 , 11 , 45 , 15 , 46 , 47 , 48 ] to better capture the multimodal distribution of robot trajectories. Despite these advancements, existing VLA frameworks remain primarily limited to tabletop manipulation tasks, leaving the complex challenges of mobile manipulation largely unexplored. To address this gap, we propose the AC-DiT architecture, which adopts a diffusion-based action generation paradigm and is specifically designed to meet the distinct perceptual demands of different stages in mobile manipulation, while explicitly modeling the interdependencies between the mobile base and the manipulator. 

## 3 Methods 

In Section 3.1 and 3.2, we begin with the problem formulation and overall architecture of our proposed AC-DiT framework. In Section 3.3 and Section 3.4, we provide a detailed introduction to the mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism and perception-aware multimodal adaptation mechanism, respectively. We then demonstrate training objectives in Section 3.5 33D Encoder         

> w/. LoRA
> ······ ······
> 𝑤 !
> ······
> Self -Attention
> Cross -Attention
> Conditions
> Mobile Manipulation
> Action Head (DiT)
> MLP
> Lightweight
> Mobility Action
> Head (DiT)
> Noised action
> Image
> Encoder
> Text
> Encoder
> Language
> Input
> Point cloud Exterior Right -wrist Left -wrist
> MLP MLP MLP
> Cosine
> Similarity
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝟏
> 𝒃𝒂𝒔𝒆 -𝒂 𝒕 #𝒌
> 𝒃𝒂𝒔𝒆
> Latent Mobility
> Feature
> Denoising
> Noised
> Mobility Action
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝟏
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝟐
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝒌
> Robot
> state
> Self -Attention
> Cross -Attention
> Self -Attention
> Cross -Attention
> Control
> Steps
> Frozen
> Fine -tune
> 𝑤 +
> ,
> 𝑤 +
> -
> 𝑤 +
> .
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝟏
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝟐
> 𝒂 𝒕 #𝒌
> ...
> Mobile Base
> Actions

Perception -aware Multimodal Adaptation Mobility -to -Body 

Conditioning 

AC -DiT Figure 2: AC-DiT framework .We first train the modules in the grey-shaded region under the supervision of mobile base actions, allowing the lightweight mobility action head to learn to extract latent mobility features. After this, we optimize the entire AC-DiT model, enabling the mobile manipulation action head to predict both mobile base and manipulator actions. With the Mobility-to-Body Conditioning mechanism, this action head conditions on the extracted latent mobility features, allowing whole-body action prediction to account for the influence of mobile base motion. Meanwhile, the Perception-Aware Multimodal Adaptation mechanism enables this action head to adaptively assign different importance weights to various visual input features, resulting in a perception-aware visual condition tailored to the perception needs of different manipulation stages. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We model mobile manipulation as a temporal sequence prediction problem, where the agent processes a history of observations ot−τ :t = {ot−τ , . . . , ot} and language condition ℓ to predict a future action sequence at+1: t+k = {at+1 , . . . , at+k}. The observation ot at each timestamp t is represented as 

ot = ( V t 

> 2D

, V t 

> 3D

, z t, c ), where V t 

> 2D

contains images from exterior, left-wrist, and right-wrist cameras, 

V t 

> 3D

represents the point cloud captured at timestamp t, zt is the robot state including the linear velocity and the angular velocity of the mobile base and joint positions of the manipulator, and c

is the control frequency of the robot. Meanwhile, we define coordination in mobile manipulation as an end-to-end control paradigm where a multi-component robot (in our case, mobile base and arm system) simultaneously generates synchronized action decisions for all components at each time step [ 7, 15 ], rather than employing sequential or phase-based control strategies. Therefore, the predicted action chunk at+1: t+k includes the mobile base control abase  

> t+1: t+k

(linear/angular velocities) and the manipulator control amanipulator  

> t+1: t+k

(joint positions). The goal is to learn an end-to-end policy 

π(at+1: t+k|ot−τ :t, ℓ ), which is trained on dataset D = {(ℓ(i), o(i) 

> t

, a(i) 

> t

) | 0 ≤ t < T (i), 1 ≤ i ≤ N }

of N trajectories, where T (i) is the length of the i-th trajectory. 

3.2 Overall Architecture 

As shown in Figure 2, AC-DiT comprises an image encoder, a 3D encoder, and a text encoder to extract features from 2D images of three camera views, 3D point cloud, and language input, 4respectively. To enable a unified feature representation across modalities, we adopt SigLIP [ 49 ]as the backbone for all three encoders. Specifically, the SigLIP image encoder is used to extract exterior view feature Ff 

> 2D

, left-wrist view feature Fl 

> 2D

, right-wrist view feature Fr 

> 2D

, which are then concatenated as 2D visual features F2D . For the point cloud input, we follow the strategy introduced in Lift3D [ 50 ], which transforms point clouds into token sequences compatible with 2D foundation models (e.g., SigLIP) with LoRA adapter [ 51 ]. This is achieved using a 3D tokenizer that processes the raw point cloud and aligns each 3D point with multiple 2D positional embeddings derived from several virtual planes projected from the 3D coordinates. The resulting 3D tokens, enriched with positional information, are then fed into the SigLIP image encoder to extract 3D geometric features 

F3D . For language input, we utilize the SigLIP text encoder to extract language features Fℓ.AC-DiT incorporates two action heads: a lightweight mobility action head Hl and a mobile manipu-lation action head H. The lightweight mobility action head Hl—comprising N stacked DiT blocks followed by a final MLP with a total of only 170 million parameters—takes the features from all three modalities—images, point clouds, and language as its input. It aims to extract latent mobility feature that captures the representation of mobile base control, which then serves as mobility prior for the mobile manipulation action head H (refer to Section 3.3). Beyond the latent mobility feature, the mobile manipulation action head H also takes the reweighted multimodal features—adaptively adjusted according to the varying perceptual demands of different mobile manipulation states—as input (refer to Section 3.4), and outputs both mobile base and manipulator actions to control the movement of robot. The detailed model parameter summary is shown in Appendix G. 

3.3 Mobility-to-Body Conditioning 

The core premise of this mechanism is that mobile base motion provides essential contextual priors for effective manipulator planning [ 9]. To explicitly capture the substantial influence of base movement on manipulator control and reduce error accumulation in high-degree-of-freedom (DoF) systems, we propose the Mobility-to-Body Conditioning mechanism. Its goal is to incorporate prior knowledge of base motion into full-body action prediction, facilitating robust and coordinated control between the mobile base and the manipulator. Specifically, before training the full AC-DiT model π, we first pretrain all modality encoders together with the lightweight mobility action head Hl (i.e., the modules highlighted with a gray background in Figure 2) for a few epochs. This pretraining phase aims to enable the model to learn to predict mobile base actions effectively. After pretraining, we enable the lightweight action head Hl to extract latent mobility features that effectively capture the base motion representation. These features are then used as informative mobility-related priors for the subsequent full-body action prediction. Next, we optimize the full AC-DiT model, which employs the mobile manipulation action head H

to predict both mobile base and manipulator actions. These predictions are conditioned not only on features extracted from all modalities but also on the latent mobility features generated by the pretrained lightweight mobility action head Hl. Specifically, to extract these latent mobility features, we collect the action tokens output by the final DiT block in the lightweight mobility action head 

Hl (prior to the final MLP layer) at each of the five denoising time steps. These tokens are then concatenated to form the latent mobility feature Fm, consisting of mobile base action representation. This latent feature is concatenated with the multimodal features, and the combined feature is fed into the cross-attention layers of mobile manipulation action head H, enabling the generation of both mobile base and manipulator actions conditioned on the mobile base prior. By doing so, this conditioning mechanism enables the manipulator to plan its actions with awareness of base movement, thereby enhancing coordination and improving the overall effectiveness of whole-body control. 

3.4 Perception-Aware Multimodal Adaptation 

To address the diverse perceptual needs across different stages of mobile manipulation, such as relying on semantic, rich 2D information for localization and geometrically precise 3D information for interaction—we design a perception-aware multimodal adaptation mechanism. This mechanism dynamically computes the similarity of 2D images and 3D point cloud modalities relative to language instructions, then adaptively assigns different importance weights to generate stage-specific visual representations. 5Specifically, we firstly use three MLPs projectors ( Proj 2D , Proj 3D and Proj ℓ) to project 2D visual feature F2D consisting of three camera views, 3D geometric features F3D , and language feature 

Fℓ into a shared latent space. We then compute the cosine similarity between each visual modality feature—specifically, the 2D image features from three views (front, left, and right) and the 3D point cloud feature—and the language feature. These similarity scores are subsequently normalized to obtain the importance weights for each modality at the current stage, denoted as w = wfi , w li, w ri , w pi .The formulation is as follows: 

{wfi , w li, w ri } = cos( Proj 2D (F2D ), Proj ℓ(Fℓ)) (1) 

wpi = cos( Proj 3D (F3D ), Proj ℓ(Fℓ)) (2) 

F fw = wfi F f 

> 2D

, F lw = wliF l 

> 2D

, F rw = wri F r 

> 2D

, F pw = wpi F p 

> 3D

(3) 

Fv = Concat( F fw ,F lw, F rw, F pw) (4) In this formulation, w∗ 

> i

is a scalar weight and F ∗ 

> 2D/ 3D

are feature vectors, resulting in scalar-vector multiplication. The reweighted visual features are then concatenated to form the perception-aware visual representation Fv . This weighted visual feature Fv , together with language features Fl and latent mobility features Fm, serves as the conditioning input for the mobile manipulation action head. This aims to measure the relevance of different visual observations to the different mobile manipulation stages. For example, it can adaptively assign less weight to left-wrist or right-wrist view images when it shows limited information (e.g., capturing floor or wall), or taking more 3D geometry feature into account when it is about to manipulate the target object. We then apply importance weights on corresponding features to obtain perception-aware visual features Fv , together with language feature Fℓ and extracted latent mobility feature Fm, forming the conditioning input for the mobile manipulation action head to predict both mobile base and manipulator actions. In this way, different importance weights are adaptively assigned to each visual input, satisfying the distinct perceptual demands at various stages of the mobile manipulation process and enabling AC-DiT to leverage appropriate perceptual priors for robust action prediction. 

3.5 Training Objectives 

During pretraining lightweight mobility action head to extract latent mobility feature, we only finetune the LoRA adapter on 3D encoder and the mobility action head, while keeping the rest of the model frozen. The predicted mobile base actions are supervised under denoising MSE loss. When training the model to predict both mobile base and manipulator actions, we update modules with a fire icon in Figure 2, except those from the pretrained SigLIP model. The predicted mobile base and manipulator actions are also supervised by denoising MSE loss. 

## 4 Experiments 

In Section 4.1, we compare the mobile and bimanual manipulation capabilities of our method against prior approaches in simulation environments. Section 4.2 presents both quantitative and qualitative results of AC-DiT in real-world scenarios. Finally, Section 4.3 evaluates the effectiveness of each component through detailed ablation studies. 

4.1 Simulation Experiments 4.1.1 Mobile Manipulation Experiments Benchmark . We employ the Maniskill-Hab (MSHab) [ 12 ] simulation benchmark, built upon the Sapien simulator [ 52 ]. MSHab further benefits from the integration of ReplicaCAD’s [ 53 ]photorealistic scene assets and YCB’s [ 54 ] standardized object models, enabling rich, interactive environments for diverse manipulation tasks. Our experiments include 7 tasks within the Set-Table 

scenario: pick_apple , place_apple , pick_bowl , place_bowl , open_fridge , open_kitchen_counter 

and close_kitchen_counter . Data collection . Following MSHab [ 12 ], training trajectories are collected with agents trained by reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Specifically, PPO [ 22 ]is used for open and close tasks, while SAC [ 21 ] is used for pick and place tasks. Additional 6Table 1: Simulation results on mobile manipulation Maniskill-Hab Benchmark. Mobile refers to the target location the agent should navigate to (e.g., Fridge or Counter), while Manipulation specifies the task the agent should perform upon arrival (e.g., Pick Apple).                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Mobile Fridge Table Fridge Counter Table Counter Counter
> Manipulation Pick Place Open Pick Place Open Close Alg. Obj. Apple Apple Door Bowl Bowl Drawer Drawer Mean S.R. ACT 28 .0±2.28.7±3.32.0±2.228 .0±2.413 .0±0.80.0±0.085 .7±1.223 .6
> DP 21 .3±3.328 .0±8.07.3±5.820 .7±3.369 .3±3.30.0±0.055 .0±5.728 .8
> 3DP 0.0±0.031 .0±0.80.0±0.020 .0±2.432 .0±0.80.0±0.068 .0±0.021 .6
> RDT 12 .0±11 .332 .0±5.782 .7±10 .510 .7±6.818 .7±5.044 .0±8.6100 .0±0.042 .9
> EquiBot 5.3±0.611 .7±2.117 .3±2.116 .3±3.24.3±4.03.0±1.053 .7±3.216 .0
> π013 .0±1.623 .3±1.731 .3±2.615 .7±1.221 .3±2.660 .0±0.870 .0±2.233 .5
> AC-DiT 33 .3±1.933 .3±9.490 .7±5.036 .0±6.517 .3±6.881 .3±6.897 .3±1.955 .6

details of simulated mobile manipulation experiments are shown in Appendix C.1. We generate 1000 successful demonstrations for each task and ensuring the same demonstrations are used by all baseline algorithms. Baselines . Due to the limited availability of open-source implementations for many state-of-the-art baselines [ 2, 8 , 10 ] for mobile manipulation, which inherently complicates reproducibility, we focus our comparative analysis on end-to-end imitation learning methods for mobile manipulation that are publicly accessible and technically reproducible. Therefore, we adopt three representative methods as our baselines: Diffusion Policy [13 ] (DP), a representative 2D imitation learning approach; 3D Diffusion Policy [ 14 ] (3DP), a representative 3D imitation learning approach; Robotics Diffusion Transformer (RDT) [11 ], a diffusion-based foundation model for generalizable manipulation; EquiBot [ 55 ], a diffusion-based method for mobile manipulation; and 

π0 [ 15 ], a flow-based vision-language-action model capable of mobile manipulation. Evaluation metric . For all methods, we evaluate 100 episodes 3 times and then compute the average success rate. We report the mean and standard deviation of success rates across the three runs. A successful test episode is defined as one in which the agent completes the task within a maximum of 200 steps. 

Training Details . To ensure fair comparison across methods, we employ identical observation and action spaces for all algorithms. For the observation space, we adopt a historical sliding window of length 2, incorporating the base velocity and absolute positions of upper-body joints. In addition to align with the recommended settings provided by MSHab and ensure fair comparison, we also incorporate several values into the robot states. These include the goal pose, object pose, end-effector pose relative to the base, and a binary indicator of whether the object is grasped. The action space mirrors this structure but uses a horizon of length 2 and replaces absolute joint positions with relative positional changes, while maintaining absolute base velocities. For baselines, we follow their original settings. 

Result Analysis . We visualize the executed tasks in the top part of Figure 3. From the results in Table 1, AC-DiT consistently achieves the highest success rates in most tasks, with a mean success rate of 48.7%, outperforming all baselines by a significant margin. For example, AC-DiT excels in challenging tasks such as “go to fridge, then open the door” (90.7%) and “go to counter, then close the drawer” (97.3%), demonstrating its strong capability in precise and coordinated of mobile manipulation. In contrast, methods like DP and 3DP exhibit relatively low performance across most tasks. In particular, 3DP struggles with processing large-scale scene-level point clouds during navigation, which makes it difficult to accurately approach the target region and interact with the target object. While the Robotics Diffusion Transformer (RDT) achieves reasonable success on some tasks, it falls short in others due to its lack of explicit modeling of the coordination between the mobile base and the manipulator. As a result, errors in the mobile base’s movement tend to accumulate and adversely affect the manipulator’s performance during execution. Since EquiBot is a diffusion algorithm that relies on object-centric point clouds, while our experimental environment supports scene-level point clouds, such point clouds may cause some interference to the algorithm, which could be the reason for its lower scores. As for π0 [ 15 ], while it demonstrates competitive performance exceeding ACT [ 6], DP [ 13 ], and DP3 [ 14 ], it is outperformed by AC-DiT in mobile manipulation tasks. One key reason is that pi0 [ 15 ] lacks explicit modeling of the locomotion-manipulation interplay, despite successfully demonstrating the feasibility of end-to-end control in specific scenarios (such as clothing pickup and folding). This performance gap underscores the critical contributions of AC-DiT’s perception-aware multimodal adaption mechanism and mobility-to-body conditioning framework, which enable seamless integration of mobility and manipulation through dynamic coordination of sensory-motor loops. Overall, the results indicate that AC-DiT’s adaptive 7Table 2: Simulation results on dual-arm RoboTwin Benchmark. Handover Contrainer_Place Cup_Place Bottles_Easy Bottles_Hard Pick_Apple Mean S.R. DP 0.7 ± 0.5 33 .7 ± 2.9 56 .7 ± 4.1 81 .0 ± 3.3 49 .0 ± 2.2 6.7 ± 1.2 37 .9                                                         

> 3DP 82 .0±4.373 .3±5.774 .7±5.383 .7±10 .761 .0±4.965 .3±5.773 .3
> RDT 85 .3±18 .056 .0±3.348 .0±6.593 .3±3.868 .0±9.869 .3±8.270 .0
> AC-DiT 100 .0±0.081 .3±8.286 .7±13 .6100 .0±0.084 .7±4.788 .0±3.390 .1

coordination and perception mechanisms significantly enhance task success across diverse mobile manipulation scenarios. Block Handover Container Empty Cup Bottles Easy Bottles Hard Apple Messy 

> RoboTwin  ManiSkill -HAB
> Move to Counter
> Open Drawer
> Move to Counter
> Close Drawer
> Move to Table
> Place Apple
> Move to Fridge
> Open Fridge
> Move to Table
> Place Bowl
> Move to Table
> Pick Bowl
> Move to Fridge
> Pick Apple

Figure 3: Robot execution visualization of 7 tasks in mobile simulator ManiSkill-HAB and 6 tasks in bimanual simulator RoboTwin. 

4.1.2 Bimanual Manipulation Experiments 

The proposed training mechanisms can be readily extended to dual-arm robotic tasks, enhancing coordination between the arms. Specifically, the perception-aware multimodal adaptation mechanism can be seamlessly applied to bimanual scenarios, while the mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism can be adapted into a dual-arm-to-dual-arm conditioning mechanism. This facilitates cross-arm prior conditioning, enabling each arm to anticipate the other’s actions before action prediction, thereby improving bimanual coordination. Therefore, we evaluate the effectiveness of these training mechanisms in the bimanual setting and assess their effectiveness on dual-arm coordination. 

Benchmark . We use RoboTwin [ 56 ] as our simulation environment, which is also built upon the Sapien simulator [ 52 ]. We adopt six commonly used dual-arm tasks from RobotWin: 

block_handover , container_place , dual_bottles_pick_easy , dual_bottles_pick_hard , empty_cup_place 

and pick_apple_messy . Additional details of simulated bimanual manipulation experiments are shown in Appendix C.2. Data collection . In RoboTwin, demonstrations are automatically generated by motion planning tools on the basis of key poses annotated by GPT-4 [ 16 ]. We generate 1000 tra-jectories for each task. Result Analysis. We visualize the executed tasks in the bottom part of Figure 3. We adopt the same baselines and evaluation metrics as described in Section 4.1.1, in which 3DP is used by RoboTwin to evaluate bimanual performance, while RDT also supports bimanual manipulation. It can be observed in Table 2, that the Diffusion Policy (DP) performs poorly across all tasks, with an average success rate of only 38.2%. In contrast, though the 3D Diffusion Policy (3DP) and Robotics Diffusion Transformer (RDT) show more stable and consistent performance, our proposed method, AC-DiT, achieves the best results across all tasks, demonstrating its strong bimanual coordination performance. These results demonstrate that our proposed method can be effectively extended to bimanual tasks, enhancing coordination between multiple robotic arms and highlighting the scalability of AC-DiT. 

4.2 Real-World experiments Dataset collection . In our real-world robot experiments, we employ the Agilex Cobot Magic plat-form, which consists of four Agilex Piper arms and a Tracer mobile base. In addition to the three Orbbec Dabai cameras located at the wrists and chest positions, we apply an extra RealSense L515 depth camera on the head to capture point clouds. We conduct four mobile manipulation tasks: mo-bile_pick_place_bread , mobile_pick_place_cumcuber , mobile_clean_table , and mobile_hang_towel .These tasks involve various objects and manipulation actions, and they are all long-horizon tasks, 8Task Progress   

> “Pick the cucumber and move it to the basket ”“Put the breads into the basket, lift the basket and turn left. ”
> “Pick up the towel, hand it to right hand, move hang it up ”“Move to the trash on the table and collect them to the bowl. ”
> Cucumber
> in Baske t
> Hang Towel
> Store Bread Clean Table
> ..
> ..
> ..
> ..
> Task Progress

Figure 4: Robot execution progress of AC-DiT in four real-world tasks. Table 3: Comparison with baselines in the real world. We report the success rate of the overall task (e.g., cucumber in basket) as well as its corresponding sub-tasks (e.g., move, grasp, move, place). Task Cucumber in Basket Store Breads Hang Towel Clean Table Sub-task Move Grasp Move Place Grasp Place Lift Move Place Grasp Handover Move Hang Bowl Bottle Sprite Move Peel Napkin ACT 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.3 68.8 6.3 0.0 50.0 12.5 12.5 0.0 0.0 37.5 81.3 6.3 0.0 6.3 68.8 25.0 18.8 12.5 18.8 37.5                                            

> π0
> 31.3 25.0 18.8 12.5 75.0 53.0 62.5 68.8 68.8 56.3 81.3 75.0 68.8 81.3 56.3 68.8 43.8 81.3 56.3 75.0 68.8 62.5 50.0 AC-DiT 50.0 56.3 43.8 43.8 93.8 75.0 68.8 93.8 87.5 100.0 81.3 87.5 81.3 75.0 81.3 68.8 68.8 100.0 75.0 81.3 56.3 81.3 75.0

including at least 4 subtasks. For each task, we collect 100 spatially generalized demonstration trajec-tories at a frequency of 30 fps. Due to space limitations, details of the hardware setup, real-world experimental settings, and corresponding results are provided in Appendix A and B, respectively. 

Training and Evaluation Details . We train a single model for all the tasks. For evaluation, we evaluate the model for 17 trials with diverse initial object poses. Given that our real-robot tasks are all long-horizon in nature, we conduct tests on each atomic subtask of these long-horizon tasks to enable a more granular comparison of each method. Note that if the previous sub-task fails, we manually reset it to allow evaluation of its performance in the next sub-task. However, for the overall task success rate, all sub-tasks must be completed successfully. 

Quantitative Results . As shown in Table 3, we compare AC-DiT with ACT [ 6], a method imple-mented for bimanual mobile manipulation, and π0 [ 15 ], a vision-language-action model also applied to bimanual mobile manipulation. Same as the results in simulators, AC-DiT performs the best across all tasks, showing its capability of mobile bimanual manipulation in real-world. Qualitative Results . As shown in Figure 4, we visualize the execution of our real-world tasks, all of which are long-horizon and involve multiple steps. These tasks are designed to showcase the capability of the proposed AC-DiT in handling complex, multi-stage mobile manipulation. Especially in the bimanual task of hanging towel, the dual robot arms must first cooperate to hand over the towel, while the mobile base simultaneously navigates to the hanger. During this process, coordination between the mobile base and the manipulators is essential to ensure the towel is stably transferred to the hanger. As the agent approaches the hanger, it must then accurately hang the towel in place. Additional qualitative results are shown in Appendix E and the failure cases are analyzed in Appendix F. Left Wrist Right Wrist Exterior Point Cloud    

> ‘Grasp Tissue ’
> ‘Move to The
> Right Table ’
> Visual Importance Weight: Unchange Decrease Increase

Figure 5: Effectiveness of Perception-aware Multimodal Adaption mechanism. As shown in Figure 5, we further visual-ize how the importance weights of differ-ent visual inputs change during the real-world clean table task to show the effectiv-ness of perception-aware multimodal adap-tation mechanism, as shown in Figure 5. When the robot approaches the table and prepares to grasp the crumpled tissue, the importance weights of the right-wrist cam-era and the point cloud increase. This is because these views provide rich seman-tic and spatial information about the target object, which helps the model accurately predict grasping actions. In contrast, the 9importance weight of the external view decreases, as the tissue is not clearly visible from that angle. The left-wrist view’s importance remains unchanged, since the left arm consistently holds a bowl and does not need to take action during this phase. While the robot is moving, the external camera’s im-portance increases, as it provides a wide field of view that supports navigation and spatial awareness. Meanwhile, the right-wrist camera’s weight decreases because its highly localized perspective offers limited help for movement. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

Table 4: Ablation study . 2D and 3D represent whether take images and points cloud as input respectively. MBC and MA denote the proposed Mobility-to-Body Conditioning (MBC) and Perception-aware Multimodal Adaption (PMA) mechanisms, respectively. 2D 3D PMA MBC Mean Gain Exp1 ✓ - - - 37 .5 -Exp2 ✓ ✓ - - 44 .8 +7 .3

Exp3 ✓ ✓ - ✓ 47 .0 +9 .5

Exp4(ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 49 .0 +11 .5

We use MSHab as the benchmark for our ablation study. Different from the main experiments, which were con-ducted with three independent runs for each configuration and reported the mean success rate and standard deviation, we only report the results from a single experimental run in this section due to computational limita-tions. Table 4 presents the results of our ablation study evaluating the im-pact of different components in the proposed AC-DiT framework. In Exp1, using only 2D visual inputs results in a baseline mean success rate of 37.5%. Introducing both 2D and 3D modalities in Exp2 yields a notable improvement (44.8%), demonstrating the benefit of multimodal fusion. Exp3 further incorporates the Mobility-to-Body Conditioning (MBC) mechanism, boosting the performance to 47.0% and suggesting that explicitly modeling the influence of the mobile base improves coordination. Finally, Exp4 integrates both MBC and the Perception-Aware Multimodal Adaptation (PMA) mechanism, achieving the best performance (49.0%). This confirms that adaptively weighting multimodal features further enhances the system’s ability to handle complex, long-horizon tasks by taking into account different perception requirements at different mobile manipulation stages. Overall, each component contributes positively, with the full model showing a total gain of 11.5 In Appendix D, we explore the impact of how the conditions are injected into the DiT, and examine the impact of how to establish the conditioning relationship. 

## 5 Conclusion and Limitations 

We present AC-DiT (Adaptive Coordination Diffusion Transformer), an end-to-end framework that advances mobile manipulation by explicitly modeling the coordination between the mobile base and the manipulator, while dynamically adapting to stage-specific perception needs. To this end, we intro-duce two key mechanisms: a mobility-to-body conditioning module, which leverages latent mobility representations to improve coordination and reduce error accumulation; and a perception-aware multi-modal adaptation module, which assigns adaptive weights to 2D and 3D visual inputs based on stage demands. Extensive experiments in both simulation and real-world settings demonstrate that AC-DiT consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, showcasing its effectiveness in robust mobile manipulation. As for limitations, since AC-DiT adopts imitation learning, the performance would fluctuate with data quantity and quality, as well as inheriting suboptimal or biased demonstrations. Finally, we state the social impact of our work in Appendix H. 10 6 Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62476011). 

## References 

[1] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [2] Ri-Zhao Qiu, Yuchen Song, Xuanbin Peng, Sai Aneesh Suryadevara, Ge Yang, Minghuan Liu, Mazeyu Ji, Chengzhe Jia, Ruihan Yang, Xueyan Zou, et al. Wildlma: Long horizon loco-manipulation in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15131 , 2024. [3] Weixin Mao, Weiheng Zhong, Zhou Jiang, Dong Fang, Zhongyue Zhang, Zihan Lan, Fan Jia, Tiancai Wang, Haoqiang Fan, and Osamu Yoshie. Robomatrix: A skill-centric hierarchical framework for scalable robot task planning and execution in open-world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00171 , 2024. [4] Peiqi Liu, Yaswanth Orru, Jay Vakil, Chris Paxton, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Lerrel Pinto. Ok-robot: What really matters in integrating open-knowledge models for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12202 , 2024. [5] Sriram Yenamandra, Arun Ramachandran, Karmesh Yadav, Austin S Wang, Mukul Khanna, Theophile Gervet, Tsung-Yen Yang, Vidhi Jain, Alexander Clegg, John M Turner, et al. Homer-obot: Open-vocabulary mobile manipulation. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,2023. [6] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. [7] Zipeng Fu, Tony Z Zhao, and Chelsea Finn. Mobile aloha: Learning bimanual mobile manipu-lation using low-cost whole-body teleoperation. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,2024. [8] Sixu Yan, Zeyu Zhang, Muzhi Han, Zaijin Wang, Qi Xie, Zhitian Li, Zhehan Li, Hangxin Liu, Xinggang Wang, and Song-Chun Zhu. M 2 diffuser: Diffusion-based trajectory optimization for mobile manipulation in 3d scenes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [9] Yunfan Jiang, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Chen Wang, Yanjie Ze, Hang Yin, Cem Gokmen, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior robot suite: Streamlining real-world whole-body manipulation for everyday household activities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05652 , 2025. [10] Josiah Wong, Albert Tung, Andrey Kurenkov, Ajay Mandlekar, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, and Roberto Martín-Martín. Error-aware imitation learning from teleoperation data for mobile manipulation. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [11] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024. [12] Arth Shukla, Stone Tao, and Hao Su. Maniskill-hab: A benchmark for low-level manipulation in home rearrangement tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13211 , 2024. [13] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649241273668, 2023. [14] Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffusion policy. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2403, 2024. 11 [15] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.24164 , 2024. [16] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [17] Naoki Wake, Atsushi Kanehira, Kazuhiro Sasabuchi, Jun Takamatsu, and Katsushi Ikeuchi. Gpt-4v (ision) for robotics: Multimodal task planning from human demonstration. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [18] Priyam Parashar, Vidhi Jain, Xiaohan Zhang, Jay Vakil, Sam Powers, Yonatan Bisk, and Chris Paxton. Spatial-language attention policies for efficient robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11235 , 2023. [19] Xuxin Cheng, Jialong Li, Shiqi Yang, Ge Yang, and Xiaolong Wang. Open-television: Teleop-eration with immersive active visual feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01512 , 2024. [20] Chenhao Lu, Xuxin Cheng, Jialong Li, Shiqi Yang, Mazeyu Ji, Chengjing Yuan, Ge Yang, Sha Yi, and Xiaolong Wang. Mobile-television: Predictive motion priors for humanoid whole-body control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07773 , 2024. [21] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1861–1870. Pmlr, 2018. [22] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [23] Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous control: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09645 ,2021. [24] Shirin Joshi, Sulabh Kumra, and Ferat Sahin. Robotic grasping using deep reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) , pages 1461–1466. IEEE, 2020. [25] OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob Mc-Grew, Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20, 2020. [26] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. [27] Hao-Shu Fang, Chenxi Wang, Hongjie Fang, Minghao Gou, Jirong Liu, Hengxu Yan, Wenhai Liu, Yichen Xie, and Cewu Lu. Anygrasp: Robust and efficient grasp perception in spatial and temporal domains. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 39(5):3929–3945, 2023. [28] Haoyu Xiong, Russell Mendonca, Kenneth Shaw, and Deepak Pathak. Adaptive mobile manipulation for articulated objects in the open world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14403 , 2024. [29] Ruihan Yang, Yejin Kim, Rose Hendrix, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Xiaolong Wang, and Kiana Ehsani. Harmonic mobile manipulation. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3658–3665. IEEE, 2024. [30] Shagun Uppal, Ananye Agarwal, Haoyu Xiong, Kenneth Shaw, and Deepak Pathak. Spin: Si-multaneous perception, interaction and navigation. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 18133–18142. IEEE, 2024. 12 [31] Jiaming Liu, Hao Chen, Pengju An, Zhuoyang Liu, Renrui Zhang, Chenyang Gu, Xiaoqi Li, Ziyu Guo, Sixiang Chen, Mengzhen Liu, et al. Hybridvla: Collaborative diffusion and autoregression in a unified vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10631 ,2025. [32] Zhuoyang Liu, Jiaming Liu, Jiadong Xu, Nuowei Han, Chenyang Gu, Hao Chen, Kaichen Zhou, Renrui Zhang, Kai Chin Hsieh, Kun Wu, et al. Mla: A multisensory language-action model for multimodal understanding and forecasting in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26642 , 2025. [33] Xiaoqi Li, Jingyun Xu, Mingxu Zhang, Jiaming Liu, Yan Shen, Iaroslav Ponomarenko, Jiahui Xu, Liang Heng, Siyuan Huang, Shanghang Zhang, et al. Object-centric prompt-driven vision-language-action model for robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 27638–27648, 2025. [34] Xiaoqi Li, Liang Heng, Jiaming Liu, Yan Shen, Chenyang Gu, Zhuoyang Liu, Hao Chen, Nuowei Han, Renrui Zhang, Hao Tang, et al. 3ds-vla: A 3d spatial-aware vision language action model for robust multi-task manipulation. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. [35] Moo Jsn Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [36] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choro-manski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 ,2023. [37] Xiaoqi Li, Mingxu Zhang, Yiran Geng, Haoran Geng, Yuxing Long, Yan Shen, Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Liu, and Hao Dong. Manipllm: Embodied multimodal large language model for object-centric robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18061–18070, 2024. [38] Jiaming Liu, Mengzhen Liu, Zhenyu Wang, Lily Lee, Kaichen Zhou, Pengju An, Senqiao Yang, Renrui Zhang, Yandong Guo, and Shanghang Zhang. Robomamba: Multimodal state space model for efficient robot reasoning and manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04339 , 2024. [39] Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang, Ya Jing, Weinan Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01378 , 2023. [40] Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hang Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13139 , 2023. [41] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 , 2024. [42] Siyuan Huang, Iaroslav Ponomarenko, Zhengkai Jiang, Xiaoqi Li, Xiaobin Hu, Peng Gao, Hongsheng Li, and Hao Dong. Manipvqa: Injecting robotic affordance and physically grounded information into multi-modal large language models. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 7580–7587. IEEE, 2024. [43] Tsung-Wei Ke, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 3d diffuser actor: Policy diffusion with 3d scene representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10885 , 2024. [44] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. 13 [45] Qixiu Li, Yaobo Liang, Zeyu Wang, Lin Luo, Xi Chen, Mozheng Liao, Fangyun Wei, Yu Deng, Sicheng Xu, Yizhong Zhang, et al. Cogact: A foundational vision-language-action model for synergizing cognition and action in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19650 ,2024. [46] Junjie Wen, Minjie Zhu, Yichen Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Jinming Li, Zhongyi Zhou, Chengmeng Li, Xiaoyu Liu, Yaxin Peng, Chaomin Shen, et al. Diffusion-vla: Scaling robot foundation models via unified diffusion and autoregression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03293 , 2024. [47] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [48] Hao Chen, Jiaming Liu, Chenyang Gu, Zhuoyang Liu, Renrui Zhang, Xiaoqi Li, Xiao He, Yandong Guo, Chi-Wing Fu, Shanghang Zhang, et al. Fast-in-slow: A dual-system foundation model unifying fast manipulation within slow reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01953 ,2025. [49] Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 11975–11986, 2023. [50] Yueru Jia, Jiaming Liu, Sixiang Chen, Chenyang Gu, Zhilue Wang, Longzan Luo, Lily Lee, Pengwei Wang, Zhongyuan Wang, Renrui Zhang, et al. Lift3d foundation policy: Lift-ing 2d large-scale pretrained models for robust 3d robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18623 , 2024. [51] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR ,1(2):3, 2022. [52] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environ-ment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 11097–11107, 2020. [53] Andrew Szot, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, et al. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange their habitat. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:251–266, 2021. [54] Berk Calli, Arjun Singh, Aaron Walsman, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Pieter Abbeel, and Aaron M Dollar. The ycb object and model set: Towards common benchmarks for manipulation research. In 2015 international conference on advanced robotics (ICAR) , pages 510–517. IEEE, 2015. [55] Jingyun Yang, Zi-ang Cao, Congyue Deng, Rika Antonova, Shuran Song, and Jeannette Bohg. Equibot: Sim (3)-equivariant diffusion policy for generalizable and data efficient learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01479 , 2024. [56] Yao Mu, Tianxing Chen, Shijia Peng, Zanxin Chen, Zeyu Gao, Yude Zou, Lunkai Lin, Zhiqiang Xie, and Ping Luo. Robotwin: Dual-arm robot benchmark with generative digital twins (early version). arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02920 , 2024. [57] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 14 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract and/or introduction clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper has discussed limitations in the paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] 15 Justification: The paper does not include theoretical results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The results are reproducible. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 16 Answer: [No] Justification: We will release after acceptance. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The experimental setting is clearly presented in the paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper reports error bars Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. 17 • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper indicates the type of compute workers. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: We follow the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: There is no social impact of the work performed. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to 18 generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper poses no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have cited the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? 19 Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] 20 Justification: The core method development in this research does not involve LLMs. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 21 Appendix A Robot Hardware Details. In this section, we provide a detailed description of the robotic platform used in our experiments, including the Agilex Piper robotic arms, the Tracer mobile base, and the camera configurations. Specific joint ranges, control modes, and sensor parameters are outlined. 

Appendix B Real-World Experiment Details. In this section, we provide comprehensive details on the real-world experiments. It covers the robot Configuration and Assets (Appendix B.1); detailed Task Descriptions (Appendix B.2) for the four complex manipulation tasks; specifics on Computa-tional Resources and Time Cost (Appendix B.3), such as GPU configuration, training stages, iteration counts, model parameters, and memory usage; and the achieved Control Frequency (Appendix B.4). 

Appendix C Simulation Experiment Details. In this section, we provide qualitative and quanti-tative results of AC-DiT in simulated tasks. We highlight key challenges in simulation and further demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed Mobility-to-Body Conditioning mechanism and Perception-Aware Multimodal Adaptation mechanism. 

Appendix D Additional Ablation Study. In this section, we present an in-depth ablation study investigating the impact of how the conditions are injected into the DiT and the impact of how to establish the conditioning relationship. 

Appendix E Additional Qualitative Results. To further validate the effectiveness of the Perception-aware Multimodal Adaptation mechanism, we supplement the visualization experiment from Figure 5 in the main paper with additional results. 

Appendix F Failure Case Analysis. In this section, we discuss common failure modes observed in real-world experiments, categorizing them into bimanual coordination errors, locomotion control failures, and issues caused by poor manipulation triggering. 

Appendix G Model Parameter Breakdown. In this section, we provide a comprehensive breakdown of the model parameters, explaining the rationale behind selecting the Lightweight Mobility Head for base control and the Large Mobile Manipulation Head for whole-body control based on task complexity and action space dimension. 

Appendix H Broader Impact. In this section, we reflect on the potential broader impact of our work, highlighting its contribution to the development of end-to-end mobile manipulation systems and its societal implications. 

## A Robot Hardware Details 

Table 5: Agilex Piper Arm Position Ranges Joint Name Range J1 −154 ◦ ∼ 154 ◦

J2 0◦ ∼ 195 ◦

J3 −175 ◦ ∼ 0◦

J4 −106 ◦ ∼ 106 ◦

J5 −75 ◦ ∼ 75 ◦

J6 −100 ◦ ∼ 100 ◦

Table 6: Configurations for cameras Parameter Value Orbbec Dabai Cameras FOV (H ×W) 80 ◦ × 66 ◦

Frequency 120 fps Realsense L515 Camera FOV (H ×W) 70 ◦ × 43 ◦

Frequency 30 fps 

Arms . As illustrated in Figure 6a, the Cobot Magic platform incorporates four 6-DoF Agilex Piper robotic arms. The two puppet arms for inference and execution each feature a parallel gripper with a 110 mm stroke. The robotic arms operate in joint position control mode, and the motion range of each joint is detailed in Table 5. 

Mobile base . The mobile base, named Tracer, is wheel-based and capable of in-situ steering and forward/backward locomotion. It is equipped with two active drive wheels and four passive idler wheels. The Tracer is controlled via a 2-DOF velocity controller, governing two independent parameters: forward velocity and rotational velocity. The base achieves a maximum speed of 1.8 meters per second. 22 Orbbec Dabai     

> Realsense L515
> Piper Arm (x4)
> Tracer
> Mobile Base

(a) Robot hardware configuration. (b) Real-World assets. 

Figure 6: Robot hardware configuration and real-world assets. 

Cameras . As shown in Figure 6a, the Cobot Magic comes pre-installed with three Orbbec Dabai cameras. To capture more precise point cloud data, we add an additional Intel RealSense L515 depth camera at the head. Notably, the two central cameras have specific design requirements for their positions and orientations. The central Dabai camera is mounted at chest level with a frontal view to enable the robot to observe a sufficiently wide field of view during mobility. Meanwhile, the L515 camera is positioned at the head with an overhead perspective to fully observe the workspace during the manipulation phase. The specific parameters of the two cameras are shown in Table 6. 

## B Real-World Experiment Details Task Progress 

> Store  Breads
> Hang  Towel
> Cucumber  in
> Basket
> Clean  Table

Figure 7: Robot execution progress of AC-DiT in real-world tasks. 

B.1 Configuration and Assets 

The robot hardware configuration and real-world assets are shown in Figure 6a and Figure 6b, respectively. Except that AC-DiT uses the RGB information from three Dabai cameras and the depth information from an L515 camera, all other baseline algorithms use the RGB information from all four cameras. Besides, as shown in Figure 7, we provide a more detailed visualization of the progress of real-world tasks. 23 Store  Breads Hang  Towel  Cucumber  in     

> Basket Clean  Table
> Lift-wrist Exterior Right-wrist Point cloud

Figure 8: Observation examples in real-world tasks. 

B.2 Task Descriptions 

Detailed descriptions of all real-world robot tasks are listed as follows: 1. Cucumber in basket. The robotic setup includes a primary worktable in front of the robot holding a cucumber and a secondary table on the robot’s left side with a basket for object placement, where the robot starts at an initial distance from the primary worktable with its arm in the rest pose. The robot must first navigate to the cucumber on the primary table, execute a grasp action to acquire it, then retreat slightly, perform a left turn maneuver to reorient toward the secondary table, navigate to the basket, and precisely deposit the cucumber into it before retracting its arm to the predefined rest position to complete the task. 2. Store bread. The robotic workspace comprises a primary worktable positioned in front of the robot, equipped with two bread items and a basket, and a secondary left-side table initially empty. The robot starts at an initial position relative to the primary worktable with its arms in the rest configuration. The task requires the robot to first navigate to the primary worktable and execute bilateral arm manipulation to transfer the bread items into the basket, followed by lifting the basket with coordinated dual-arm motion. Subsequently, the robot performs a backward translation, a left rotational reorientation, and navigates to the secondary table, where it deposits the basket with precise placement to complete the task. 3. Hang towel. The robotic task environment consists of a workdbench positioned in front of the robot, bearing a towel as the target object, and a hanging rack located on the robot’s left lateral side. The robot initiates the task at an initial pose in front of the workbench with its arms in the rest configuration. The operational sequence begins with the robot using its left arm to execute a precision grasp of the towel, followed by a bimanual transfer to the right arm. The robot then performs a minor backward translation, a left rotational reorientation, and navigates to the hanging rack, where it executes a towel-hanging action with precise placement on the rack. The task is concluded by the robot returning both arms to their predefined rest positions. 4. Clean table. The robotic workspace features a workbench equipped with four waste objects: a Sprite bottle, a Cestbon bottle, orange peel, and a crumpled tissue. A large bowl and two randomly positioned waste objects are initially placed on the workbench’s left side, with the remaining two objects on the right side. At task initiation, the robot is positioned on the left side of the workbench with its arms in the default configuration. The task sequence unfolds as follows: first, the robot uses its left arm grasp to lift the large bowl, then utilizes its right arm to transfer the two left-side waste objects into the bowl. Subsequently, the robot performs a short backward translation, reorients toward the front-right direction, and navigates to the workbench’s right side, where it continues using its right arm to deposit the remaining two objects into the bowl, thereby completing the task. 24 B.3 Computational Resource and Time Cost 

Our proposed approach was trained on a server equipped with eight NVIDIA A100 (80 GB) GPUs. The training process consisted of two stages: an initial Mobility pretraining phase (Stage 1) comprising 20,000 iterations, followed by training of the full AC-DiT model (Stage 2), which comprised 30,000 iterations. The lightweight mobility head of our model contains 170 million parameters, while the full AC-DiT model has a total of 1.2 billion parameters. During training with a batch size of 16, the system utilized approximately 60 GB of GPU memory. Inference requires less memory, consuming about 20 GB of GPU memory. 

B.4 Control Frequency 

The model achieves an inference speed of 5Hz on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. This speed, combined with action chunking, allows for a robot control frequency of 30Hz. The total processing time for a single control step is 0.2s, which is composed of the model inference time (0.16s), perception information acquisition (0.03s), and point cloud computation (0.01s). 

## C Simulation Experiment Details 

C.1 ManiSkill-Hab Simulationi Environment 

Figure 9: Robot execution progress of AC-DiT in seven MSHab simulation tasks. Figure 9 illustrates the process of AC-DiT executing simulation tasks in MSHab environments and Figure 10a shows the observation examples of each task in MSHab. Notably, in the MSHab simulator, since trajectories are collected by the RL agent, the mobile base and manipulator frequently exhibit 25 Exterior Wrist Point Cloud 

> Move to Fridge
> Open Fridge
> Move to Fridge
> Pick Apple Move to Table
> Place Apple
> Move to Counter
> Pick Bowl Move to Table
> Place Bowl Move to Counter
> Open Drawer Move to Counter
> Close Drawer

(a) Observation examples in MSHab simulation tasks. Left-Wrist Exterior Right-Wrist Point Cloud 

> Handover
> Container
> Empty Cup
> Bottles Easy
> Bottles Hard
> Apple Messy

(b) Observation examples in RoboTwin simulation tasks. 

Figure 10: Observation examples in MSHab and RoboTwin simulations. concurrent motion. This scenario rigorously evaluates the coordination capability between the mobile base and manipulator while further underscoring the efficacy of the mobility-to-body condition mechanism. Specifically, in the task depicted in Figure 9, the mobile base and the manipulator perform concurrent motions to approach the target object, yet the gripper still accurately executes the manipulation at the optimal timing. This demonstrates that AC-DiT’s modeling of coordination plays a critical role in achieving such seamless integration of locomotion and manipulation. 

C.2 RoboTwin Simulation Environment 

Figure 11 illustrates the process of AC-DiT executing simulation tasks in RoboTwin environments and Figure 10b present the observation examples of each task in RoboTwin. Notably, the Handover 

task necessitates coordinated collaboration between two arms rather than independent actions, under-scoring the critical requirement for bimanual coordination. This further highlights that AC-DiT’s dual-arm-to-dual-arm conditioning mechanism in RobotWin—derived from the mobility-to-body conditioning mechanism—plays a pivotal role by providing each arm with short-term motion priors, thereby enhancing bimanual coordination. 

## D Additional Ablation Study 

Table 7: Ablation Study. We explore the im-pact of how the conditions are injected into the DiT. Condition Injection Mean Cross-Attention Alternatively 43 .7

Cross-Attention 44 .8

Table 8: Ablation Study. We explore the im-pact of how to establish the conditioning rela-tionship. Condition Mechanism Mean Up-to-Body 47.3 Mobility-to-Body 49.5 26 Task Progress 

> Hanover
> Container
> Empty Cup
> Bottles Easy
> Bottles Hard
> Apple Messy

Figure 11: Robot execution progress of AC-DiT in seven RoboTwin simulation tasks. 

The impact of how the conditions are injected into the DiT. We empirically evaluated two different methodologies for condition injection into DiT. First, following the RDT framework [ 11 ], we use cross-attention for alternating condition injection. Second, we implement cross-attention-based condition injection with concatenation of all conditional features in each injection step [ 57 ]. As shown in Table 7, cross-attention variants (with or without alternatively injection) exhibit comparable performance, with the non-alternatively-injection scheme achieving marginally superior results due to its higher information throughput relative to the alternatively-injection one. 

The impact of how to establish the conditioning relationship. In AC-DiT, we first extract a latent mobility feature to serve as a condition for mobile manipulation action prediction, as shown in the “Mobility-to-Body" setting in Table 8. In this section, we compare this approach with using a latent manipulator feature—specifically, the arm joint position—as the condition, corresponding to the “Up-to-Body" setting in Table 8. We observe that using the latent mobility feature outperforms using the latent manipulator feature. This is because the mobile base actions have a significant impact on manipulator control; errors in the mobility prediction can accumulate and propagate to the manipulator stage. Therefore, we adopt the strategy of first extracting the latent mobility feature as the condition to alleviate potential error accumulation and enhance coordination. 

## E Additional Qualitative Results 

Adaptive importance weights analysis. To further validate the effectiveness of the Perception-aware Multimodal Adaptation mechanism, we supplement the visualization experiment from Figure 5 in the main paper with additional results, as shown in Figure 12. We visualize the observations at three different time steps. As shown, the importance of the left-wrist camera remains unchanged, since the left arm consistently holds a bowl and does not need to take action during this phase. In contrast, at time steps 1 and 3, the importance weights of the right-wrist camera and the point cloud increase obviously, as they provide critical information for completing the manipulation task. Meanwhile, the exterior camera maintains a relatively high importance, as it still captures both the manipulated object and the robot arms from a broader perspective. In contrast, during the movement phase at step 2, the importance weight of the point cloud drops significantly, due to the limited sensing range of the depth camera. 27 Lift-wrist Exterior Right-wrist Point cloud 

t1 

t2 

t3 Figure 12: Visualization of Perception-aware Multimodal Adaption mechanism on a whole episode. 

## F Failure Case Analysis 

Despite extensive physical robot experiments, we identify three primary error categories affecting AC-DiT’s performance. First category: Bimanual coordination errors . Bilateral arm collaboration is required for tasks such as transferring a towel from the left hand to the right hand, where the right hand occasionally fails to grasp the correct pose, or the right arm inaccurately deposits waste into a bowl, causing objects to fall outside due to minor positional deviations. Second category: 

Locomotion errors . Since robot movement is controlled by a velocity controller, whose actual motion results from the integration of velocity commands over time, cumulative errors may occur. The model sometimes outputs excessively high velocities, leading the robot into unrecoverable error states, or insufficient velocities that prevent chassis movement. Mitigating this issue relies on dataset quality—ideally, data should be collected by a single operator with minimal velocity fluctuations maintained at a suitable constant value during recording. Third category: Suboptimal manipulation triggering due to poor locomotion termination . When the robot stops at a state outside the dataset’s distribution, the subsequent manipulation primitives often fail, as the end pose does not align with the precondition for successful object interaction. 

## G Model Parameter Summary 

We display the comprehensive parameter breakdown in Table 9, specifically detailing all components shown in Figure 2 of the main paper. The relative small DiT architecture (Lightweight Mobility Head, 170M DiT) is selected for mobile base control as it has relatively fewer output degrees of freedom 28 Table 9: Model Parameter Summary. 

Component Parameters Architecture Details 

Image Encoder 428M (frozen) SigLIP-based multi-view vi-sual feature extraction Text Encoder 450M (frozen) SigLIP-based language in-struction encoding 3D Encoder w/. LoRA 430M (0.09% LoRA) Point cloud processing with LoRA adaptation Perception-aware Multi-modal Adaptation 1M Linear Projectors Mobile Manipulation Action Head (DiT) 1.2B Main DiT-based head for whole-body action predic-tion Lightweight Mobility Action Head (DiT) 170M DiT blocks for base motion prediction 

Total Trainable ∼1.37B Total trainable parameters Total Model ∼2.7B Including frozen founda-tion models 

(linear/angular velocities), providing sufficient modeling capacity while reducing computational overhead. The relative large architecture (Large Mobile Manipulation Head,1.2B DiT) is selected for the more complex mobile manipulation task, where higher parameter count provides better robustness and generalization capability needed for coordinated whole-body control with higher-dimensional action spaces. 

## H Broader Impact 

Our work develops an end-to-end mobile manipulation framework based on DiT [ 57 , 11 ] by explicitly modeling the collaborative relationship between the mobile base and the manipulator, and by adap-tively adjusting weights according to perceptual needs at various stages of mobile manipulation. This research aims to innovate by extending end-to-end models to mobile manipulation tasks, and it does not pose direct societal impacts. We hope our efforts can foster research in the field of end-to-end control for mobile manipulation while promoting the healthy, controlled, and sustainable development of the entire field. 29